title: Growth Architecture for Social Enterprise
link: http://dustinlarimer.com/?p=35
author: dustinlarimer
description: 
post_id: 35
created: 2010/05/28 15:38:46
created_gmt: 2010/05/28 19:38:46
comment_status: open
post_name: growth-architecture-for-social-enterprise
status: pending
post_type: post

# Growth Architecture for Social Enterprise

This article is currently being rewritten. Check back soon for the real deal. 

This is a weekly journal of the efforts comprising DMGT 765: Business and Design Practicum at the Savannah College of Art & Design. Our team is just one of many involved in the IDUS4Haiti project blitz at SCAD.  We are all very eager to engage as many people (both inside and outside SCAD) as possible - especially, of course, those actively involved on the ground in Haiti - so please share any and all ideas, suggestions, leads or arguments here and I will hook you up with the appropriate team(s). 

#### Week 1

SCAD's IDUS4Haiti project campaign is officially underway. Several graduate and undergraduate classes are actively immersing themselves in news reports, data, aid worker blogs, and current on-the-ground initiatives, trying to understand the moving parts of the Haitian pre- and post-quake situation so as to gain fresh insights into emerging opportunities for participation in a massive relief effort. One undergrad class is leaning towards exploring localized, sustainable agriculture, another has committed to the development and production of amputee mobility devices for victims of the quake. My graduate class, DMGT 765, is currently developing a comprehensive evaluation of the uncontrollable forces at work in Haiti, or a "10 Forces Environmental Analysis." Specifically, technological, geographic (physical and environmental), socio-cultural, economic, financial, political, legal, labor, competitive (all industries), and distributive (asset flows). One very interesting detail we discovered was how the Prime Minister of Haiti, recently featured in a [Planet Money segment on NPR](http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2010/03/podcast_who_gets_to_be_in_char.html), is being very clear about the importance semantics play in his country's recovery. He feels that "opportunity" is a very distasteful word, but Haiti certainly can make good of the situation and bring forth a world that they didn't have the chance to create before. He says this is not a "Reconstruction" of what was before but rather a "Re-foundation" of Haiti; a fresh start. He also stressed that streams of aid money will fade if you don't nurture it and keep it alive. Money, supplies and aid workers are certainly pouring into the country now, but we're already seeing some aid workers leave and national (US) attention being diverted to other issues. The rainy season has arrived, and hurricane season is only a few months away. The leading cause of death before the quake was bacterial infection, primarily caused by an unreal degree of water pollution and sanitation. 80% of the population lived below the poverty line, and 54% lived in abject poverty. 28% of Haiti's GDP was derived from agriculture (mostly subsidence farming), 20% from industry (light assembly manufacturing, textiles, cement, sugar refining), and 52% from services, but an unskilled labor force 3.6 million strong is a huge challenge obstructing economic development. We certainly have a lot of work to do in the coming weeks, and are eager to hear any advice or recommendations for good sources of information or just ideas in general. Please comment with your thoughts on the matter and I'll pass it along to the appropriate project teams. This is looking to be a big quarter! 

#### Week 2

Fresh into Week 2, our team just had a great chat with our primary contact for our particular piece of the effort, Michael Murphy, Executive Director of [MASS](http://www.masslab.org), based out of Cambridge, MA. MASS' mission is to deliver infrastructure for the under-served: 

> "We believe architecture needs to rewrite its social contract. At MASS we value the highest architectural design AND the role that architecture should play as an agent of positive social change. MASS uses the built environment to propose new models of social, economic, and environmental sustainability."

MASS is working with Partners in Health (PIH) to assist with the Haitian reconstruction effort, or, [as the Prime Minister recently corrected](http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2010/03/podcast_who_gets_to_be_in_char.html), the "Re-foundation" of Haiti. Their effort in Haiti is rooted in the philosophy that vocational education programs focused on carpentry, masonry, metal-work, etc., need to be installed early on to create a strong foundation of skilled workers who can then go to work building a lasting infrastructure. Our purpose in this effort will be to explore alternative business models that minimize 3rd-party donor aid and volunteerism in favor of a more self-sufficient approach. Donations and volunteerism will always have a place in helping populations recover from disaster, but it is simply not sustainable over the long term, and often ignores the social value that is created when people are empowered to realize solutions to their own problems through economic frameworks for social enterprise. Participation and the renegotiation of meaning are critical components of learning and identity. When solutions are imposed on a social group with no chance for constructing or renegotiating its meaning, the solution is either reinvented or abandoned altogether. "Design for the people" rarely works the way it's intended. "Design by the people" is where we need to be looking, and as designers we should focus our efforts on creating the conditions for learning and creativity. 

#### Week 3

Our project's direction is finally being to take shape. Over the past few weeks we have met and spoken with some great individuals who are directly involved in a number of different initiatives on the ground in Haiti, and have also had a little time to digest our initial research findings. Overall it seems we are beginning to construct a tacit image of the situation. No amount of secondary research can ever compensate for being so removed from the target context (we are working on that as well), but we at least have identified several patterns that can now either be reinforced or reconfigured. One particularly interesting pattern involves the sociocultural dynamics of government-managed education and the institutionalized "linguistic apartheid" that results. While most administrative functions operate in French, the majority of Haitians speak Creole. Education is taught primarily in French through rote memorization with two make-or-break exams that must be passed to continue to the next grade. I had a chance to speak with two Savannah-area missionaries who have spent the last 20 years working in Haiti, and learned that (by their account) only 40% of Haitian children attend school, of which only 15-30% pass each exam. This archaic view of front-loading education through rote memorization, not to mention in a non-native language, stifles creativity and assuredly guarantees the failure of a massive proportion of the nation's youth.