title: Out of Poverty by Paul Polak
link: http://dustinlarimer.com/out_of_poverty_by_paul_polak/
author: dustinlarimer
description: 
post_id: 37
created: 2010/04/11 13:42:14
created_gmt: 2010/04/11 19:42:14
comment_status: open
post_name: out_of_poverty_by_paul_polak
status: publish
post_type: post

# Out of Poverty by Paul Polak

For a growing number of designers out there **who are eager to apply their skills toward something more significant than greasing sales of pop gadgetry and disposable consumerist fads**, this book offers a glimpse of something refreshing. Cutting-edge design is needed more in the developing world than in any other, and the approach Polak shares aligns perfectly with the methodologies and frameworks that many of the design-minded already call a day-to-day grind. Out of Poverty focuses those methods toward simple, common-sense problem-solving (more accurately, "context-improving") for the people who need it most, and should ultimately be taken as a deliberate challenge for the socially-concerned designer to go where the action is, as well as a guide for how to do it. 

#### Background

Over half a trillion dollars has been in Africa over the past forty years, mostly on large infrastructure projects such as dams, schools, and roads, and while it has had a somewhat identifiable impact on poverty, the per capita growth rate of the continent over this period has stuck right around zero. Huge projects generating meager returns lead to massive debt cancellations in the 1980s and again in 2006. Over the years a simple but rather controversial idea has been building consensus that massive international give-aways cannot deliver progress the way grassroots, bottom-up enterprise can. In some sectors they actually end up doing more harm than good, killing fledgling markets and stifling home-grown entrepreneurial innovation. Market-based development has been met with heavy resistance by well-meaning do-gooders the world over, and is often portrayed as the exploitative, manipulative force behind many problems in the developing world. The thing to remember about markets, though, is that Western capitalism certainly did not invent them. Markets are as old as our kind, and have long been a place where we peacefully leverage our strengths to best the constraints that otherwise challenge our very survival. (In our world the word "capitalism" seems to carry a lot of experiential political and social baggage that we'll have to deal with sooner or later.) Polak identifies three three myths that have long skewed the conventional approach to eradicating poverty. 

  1. We can donate people out of poverty
  2. National economic growth will end poverty
  3. Big business will end poverty
If the first myth held any truth, then poverty should be long gone. We don't have to look far from home to see holes in the second myth: well over 10% of the United States population currently lives in poverty, and that number has grown much larger over the past few years. Big business certainly has the potential to make a decent dent in poverty, and while there are certainly great examples of good efforts, the majority have not yet RSVP'd and show no signs of doing so. The extremity of high-volume, low-margin market offerings that is required is well off most established businesses' radars. 

#### So, what exactly causes poverty?

There are seemingly as many problem-definitions for poverty as there are well-meaning organizations to pursue them. Some say people live in poverty because they have no power, and that we must give them a voice so they can defend and promote their own needs and interests fairly along with everyone else. Others say (as have I) that education should be the primary focus, and that educating children can move entire populations out of poverty within a single generation. Another argument is to eradicate major illnesses that would derail the ambitions of newly-educated youth. Healthcare should be improved, as well as access to safe water, sanitation, transportation. It's quite easy to see how these issues are all interrelated, and so the solution shifts: solve all of them! It's complicated! Polak suggests that when the complexities of a problem prove too snarled and unmanageable to handle piece-by-piece, it's best to look for simple points of high-leverage that help direct the system along a new trajectory. "The biggest reason most poor people are poor is because they don't have enough money." When poor people are able to increase their income, solutions to all of those other problems become attainable. The majority of the world's poor are small-plot subsistence farmers occupying five or fewer acres of farmland. They grow common commodity goods during regional rainy seasons, producing just enough to feed their families for most of the year and hope for enough of a profit from (literally) saturated markets to cover planting costs for the next season. There has been much debate over whether or not the poor are inclined to entrepreneurial action, but Polak asserts that they are tough, entrepreneurial survivalists, ready to take carefully calculated risks to improve their situations. Small-plot farms account for a staggering 85% of total farms in the world, and are home to around 2.2 billion people. 800 million of those people live on $1/day or less, and occupy smaller plots around 1/4 to 1/5 of an acre. The problem arises from the fact that the majority of modern agriculture technology is geared towards enhancing the production of large-scale farms that exceed 400 acres in size. As Polak argues, 90% of the world's designers design for 10% of the world's richest customers, because "that's where the money is." 

#### Millions of tiny horses!

Polak shares a wonderful exercise in analogical thinking to demonstrate his approach to this problem. The following excerpt is from chapter four: "Design for the Other 99 Percent", in a section titled "How Many Ants Does It Take to Make a Horse?" (p.66-67) 

Put yourself in the shoes of Peter Mukula, a poor farmer who lives along a dusty road twenty-five kilometers from Livingstone in southern Zambia. If he could afford to buy a packhorse, he could make an extra six hundred dollars a year hauling vegetables to the Livingstone market. Buy there's no way he can beg, borrow, or steal the five hundred dollars it would take to buy a horse today. Try this brainteaser- see if you can think of a practical solution to Peter's dilemma. Let me throw out some crazy ideas. What if Peter could buy a quarter-horse? Not a purebred quarter horse, but a horse that's a quarter the size of a regular packhorse. Let's assume that he could buy such a miniature horse for one hundred and fifty dollars and that it could pack sixty kilograms. Peter would earn less money each trip, but he could gradually use his profits to buy more miniature horses. Once he owned four of them, they would be hauling the same two hundred and forty kilos as a full-size packhorse. But even if a small packhorse were available, one hundred fifty dollars is still far more than what Peter could afford to pay. Perhaps he could find a pygmy horse one-twelfth the size of a standard horse that would cost fifty dollars and carry twenty kilos. After five years, Peter might be able to expand to a string of twelve pygmy horses and earn the six hundred dollars a year, the same as he would with a full-size packhorse. Interestingly enough, purebred miniature horses thirty-five inches high and weighing one hundred fifty to three hundred pounds are available. Unfortunately, they cost fifteen hundred to three thousand dollars! Here's an even crazier idea. Suppose we could invent a way to harness the remarkable strength-to-weight ratio of the common forest ant? An engineering class in Germany designed tiny weights that could be attached to an ant's back and determined that forest ants can carry as much as thirty times their own weight. (A human can only carry about double.) How many ants would it take to carry the same load as a packhorse? I did the numbers. It would take 1.25 million ants to carry Peter's two hundred forty-kilos. Now 1.25 million ants would come pretty cheap. But designing the harness would be a challenge.