title: What are you the 1-2% of?
link: http://dustinlarimer.com/?p=378
author: dustinlarimer
description: 
post_id: 378
created: 2010/09/20 21:28:36
created_gmt: 2010/09/21 01:28:36
comment_status: open
post_name: what-are-you-the-1-2-of
status: pending
post_type: post

# What are you the 1-2% of?

> Conversation is the source of the mind's concepts.  – Keith Sawyer

A great insight from Keith Sawyer that speaks directly to the design of the human mind – not as a standalone idea-machine, but as a transponder in the unbroken remix of the human experience.  Creativity is a product of social interaction. Like Marcus Aurelius said, "people exist for one another." We are designed to influence and enrich each other to create new possibilities for novelty. Even the most extraordinary achievements of great individuals were socially inspired; the culmination of untold years of experience and insight handed down through time, exchanged, debated, expanded and refined, day-in and day-out. As much as we love our heroes, nature seems to avoid the notion altogether. "Nature is not efficient, it is abundant." - It does not take the shortest route, it takes ALL routes, always. We should notice how effective this is... the redundancy of six billion interconnected, creative minds continues to be a winning model, and only seems to grow more powerful as we shorten the distance between those minds. A series of conversations took place this summer that had a very profound impact on my outlook. You could say it connected a few dots that previously eluded me, the implications of which have me rethinking almost every scrap of advice I've ever given someone wondering what they should do with their life. While visiting my friend Peter Gloor this past summer a simple chat began around a book recommendation. Peter's research at MIT is centered around exploring the creative power of the swarm – mutually engaged minds exchanging ideas, solving problems, and otherwise putting the world in order. Of particular interest to Gloor and his team are the relatively few ultra-connected, ultra-productive participants at the core of these efforts. Statistically, these badasses make up only about 1-2% of the swarm, but are responsible for the lion's share of the community's output. One absurdly-caffeinated morning a conversation began around a book recommendation, The Mythical Man-Month, written by Fred Brooks, project manager from IBM during the development of OS/360. In The Mythical Man-Month, Brooks advocates that lightweight teams of heavyweight developers can accomplish great technical feats in less time and at less expense than traditional, large-scale software development orthodoxy dictates. If you're even remotely familiar with web/dev entrepreneurship, this should sound very familiar. [37signals](http://www.37signals.com) have been making a fortune on this concept by quickly pushing out wonderfully useful web apps, and [bottling their provocative formula](http://37signals.com/rework/) for success. Once the recipe for their secret sauce hit print, the masses gobbled it right up, and its authors became legends. Their "cut the crap and build the damn thing" mentality of project management was a timely, rejuvenating divorce from conventional logic of nightmarish project specs, requirements meetings, meetings to schedule more meetings, then meetings about those meetings, and other needless interruptions. This new style they preached was exciting, and sounded so easy... do less, but do it better. And so their method became a manifesto for how things _should_ be. In practice, these revolutionary bursts of common sense are rarely as easy to pull off than they are to waste a workday jabbering about. The most important ingredient of the recipe for success cannot simply be sprinkled on a project.  Regardless, an entire industry was inspired – and that's really the point, right? A contradiction!!! How can I start by discrediting the individual, and then praising these all-stars?!   Well, we're not talking about standout individuals, we're talking about standout _teams_ – those who collaborate well, communicate often, and operate at exceedingly high levels of output. The creative chemistry that exists among the 37signals crew is the magic that makes their method work. Behavior drives, building structure that will positively reinforce it.  We simply cannot dump artificial structure into a culture and expect it to stick... we must all _realize it together_. During my travels this past summer I came to realize that while the human condition varies greatly the world over, the human experience is essentially the same. We all work with the same incredible capacity for creativity, but with dramatically different influences and experiences, per nature's strategic preference for abundance. We are each uniquely tuned to excel at different things relative to those influences and experiences, and so are strategically predisposed to spearhead the cutting-edge of all possible paths forward, bringing new opportunities to light for human kind at large. The key point to emphasize is that YOU are part of nature's plan, and all of your random, seemingly unrelated experiences of your life have prepared you for something very unique. We don't always recognize the opportunities at hand. Sometimes these new possibilities just haven't yet been given a name, or maybe just too absorbed in what we're doing right now. Richard Normann and Kees van der Heijden warn that a company that identifies itself too closely with its product loses the opportunity to up-frame – to redefine its purpose. Consider the possibilities that emerged for a company like Shell when it realized it was not an oil company, but an _energy_ company. How might we upframe ourselves in that way? What patterns are waiting to be revealed among the dots of your life – the stuff you don't include on your resumé or the long forgotten inspirations from your childhood? For me this particular realization came when I was considering just that – the inspirations and influences that led me to where I am today. >> Read about what drives me: [TITLE] Taking the time to reflect upon and explore these patterns has revealed that I am more or less exactly where I should be, doing exactly what I should be doing, which has given me more confidence and enthusiasm than any cowboy-coding project management self-help book could ever hope to offer. It was simply a matter of coming to terms with what I was meant to be. The critical question – THE question – is, **what are you the 1-2% of? What has life prepared you to do?** When you know, go find the conversation –there will certainly be others out there looking for you– that speaks to your total self, the things that make you you, beyond just what you happen to be doing at this moment. Once you find your crowd of like-minded comrades, make yourself known, and get to work putting the world in order.